# 2022 Mar 1

Read papers on Southern Annular Mode (SAM). This lab notebook belongs to a set of [preliminary research](intro.md).

(Renwick2006)=
## Southern Annular Mode & New Zealand Climate, Renwick & Thompson 2006

This is a short article providing a brief outline of what the SAM is (how it physically manifests) and what the trend was in 2006. 

### Summary

The SAM is a seemingly unpredictable phenomena ehihc flips between two phases - positive & negative. The positive phase is identified by lower than average pressure over the Antarctic, and higher pressures over higher latitude bands around 40-50S (over the south island of New Zealand). This results in light westerly winds and more predictable weather over New Zealand latitudes, and stronger westerly winds over the Southern Ocean (50-70S). The negative phase is associated with the reverse, with weather around New Zealand more unsettled. 

:::{note}
A phase shift can only be known a few days in advance, but the ensuing phase could last for several weeks.
:::

Recent trends show that the SAM is more frequently in the positive phase, which indicates this might be something to expect in the future. 

There indications that the SAM phase is influenced by the ozone hole and the stratosphere (as detailed in [])(section-label). There are also strong ties between the SAM and storm tracks.

### Questions
- What are the current trends? (this was written in 2006)
    - Are the pressure differentials becoming more extreme?
- What causes SAM?

(section-label)=
## The Southern Annular Mode: Variability, trends, and climate impacts across the Southern Hemisphere, Fogt & Marshall 2020

