# 2022 Mar 3

## Overview
Formed a basic understanding of how global circulation patterns & phenomena arise. Read papers on storm tracks, tried to decipher what causes storm tracks and what characterises them. This lab notebook belongs to a set of [preliminary research](intro.md).

## Basics of Global Circulation

### Temperature Gradient

Global circulation patterns occur firstly because of the heating differential from the Sun. Locations at higher latitudes receive less heat due to their high angle of incidence, as well as the increased amount of atmosphere that must be penetrated due to this high angle, resulting in a higher absorption of insolation in the atmosphere and less surface heating. This creates a temperature differential between the equator and the poles that drives air circulation polewards. 

### Circulation Cells

The polewards circulation does not happen in one uniform circulating cell, but is split into three main cells: Hadley cells, Polar cells; and Ferrel cells. These cells are the predominant heat transport mechanisms.
- Hadley Cells:
    - Located between the equator and 30 degrees
    - Warm air rises at the equator (low pressure band), spreads out at the tropopause and cools, and sinks at 30 degrees (high pressure band)
- Polar Cells:
    - Located between poles and 60 degrees
    - Warm air rises at 60 degrees (low pressure band), spreads out at the tropopause and cools, and sinks at the poles (high pressure band)
- Ferrel Cells:
    - Located between 30 and 60 degrees
    - Different to the Hadley and Polar cells in that the direction of circulation is reversed.
    - The work of these cells results in semi-permanent areas of high and low pressure.

```{note}
Ferrel cells are different in another way too; they are not driven by temperature, but are in fact driven by strong eddies created by the polar and subtropical jets.
```

### Coriolis Effect

The Coriolis effect is a result of the rotation of the Earth. This rotating reference frame creates a virtual force to an observing assuming a stationary reference frame. 

The Coriolis force causes winds to be deflected to the left of their direction of motion (in the SH, it is reversed in the NH). This is due to the speed of rotation being greater at the equator than it is at the poles. This action means that by the time winds reach 30-40 degrees from the equator, they are largely moving in a westerly direction, creating the trade winds observed around these latitudes (southerasterlies in the SH).

### Jet Streams

As hot air rises and moves polewards, it migrates under the influence of the coriolis effect. This forces the rising air to travel in an easterly direction. Due to conservation of angular momentum, the speed of the winds originating at lower latitudes increases as they move polewards, reaching a maximum around 30 degrees in the Hadley cell, and around 60 degrees in the Polar cell, at which point they have almost lost their polewards velocity component. At these locations are found the jet streams, sub-tropical (between Hadley and Ferrel cells) and polar (between Polar and Ferrel cells). Jet streams are located at the top of the troposphere and are extremely strong winds, reaching up to 400kph.

The interactions between the upper-troposhere jet streams and surface pressure systems is complex. Surface-level pressure systems can influence where the jet streams are found and vice-versa. The jet streams are also not a simple uniform band structure, but wander between meridians, have areas of higher winds and lower winds. They also migrate with the seasons, moving equatorwards in the winter and polewards in the summer as the total insolation varies.

Following information obtained from Lower-Tropospheric Processes chapter in Synoptic Analysis and Forecasting by Milrad (2018) {cite}`milrad_lower-tropospheric_2018`:

Jet streams are in a large part driven by temperature gradient. The height of the troposphere is proportional to the temperature due to the corresponding density being greater at colder temperatures. Hence the height of the tropopause is lower at high latitudes than it is at the equator. 

```{note}
This is often why isobaric surfaces are preferred to altitude as it is a constant measure, whereas altitude of atmospheric characteristics varies with latitude (so to speak). 
```

The height difference results in varying layer thicknesses between two isobaric surfaces. This is important when it comes to powering the jet streams. A higher temperature gradient increases the thickness of a layer and results in a higher pressure gradient between latitudes. Thus as the overturning circulation travels northward, the stronger the gradient the stronger the jet streams will be. This process is described by the thermal wind relationship {cite}`ams_thermal_2012`.


(WallaceHobbs7)=
## Atmospheric Science: An Introductory Survey, Ch.7 Atmospheric Dynamics, Wallace & Hobbs 2006

Gives a general overview of how to analyse large-scale atmospheric circulation.

### Questions

- What is vorticity? What are its implications?

### Key Assumptions

- Large-scale: 
    - Horizontal scale on order of a few hundred kilometres.
    - Vertical scale on order of the depth of the troposphere.
    - Time scales of a day or longer.
- System in hydrostatic balance.
- Adiabatic processes.
- Vertical component of velocity vector is more than three orders of magnitude smaller than horizontal component.

### Key Equations

$$
    \begin{eqnarray}
      Vorticity, \zeta   & = & \nabla  \times  V \\
      Divergence, Div_H V & = & \nabla  .  V
    \end{eqnarray}
$$

