# 2022 Mar 2

## Overview
Read papers on Southern Annular Mode (SAM) & briefly on storm tracks. This lab notebook belongs to a set of [preliminary research](landing-page.md).

(Renwick2006)=
## Southern Annular Mode & New Zealand Climate, Renwick & Thompson 2006 {cite}`renwick_2006`

This is a short article providing a brief outline of what the SAM is (how it physically manifests) and what the trend was in 2006 . 

### Summary

The SAM is a seemingly unpredictable phenomena ehihc flips between two phases - positive & negative. The positive phase is identified by lower than average pressure over the Antarctic, and higher pressures over higher latitude bands around 40-50S (over the south island of New Zealand). This results in light westerly winds and more predictable weather over New Zealand latitudes, and stronger westerly winds over the Southern Ocean (50-70S). The negative phase is associated with the reverse, with weather around New Zealand more unsettled. 

```{note}
A phase shift can only be known a few days in advance, but the ensuing phase could last for several weeks.
```

Recent trends show that the SAM is more frequently in the positive phase, which indicates this might be something to expect in the future. 

There indications that the SAM phase is influenced by the ozone hole and the stratosphere (as detailed in [])(section-label). There are also strong ties between the SAM and storm tracks.

### Questions
- What are the current trends? (this was written in 2006)
    - Are the pressure differentials becoming more extreme?
- What causes SAM?

(Fogt2020)=
## The Southern Annular Mode: Variability, trends, and climate impacts across the Southern Hemisphere, Fogt & Marshall 2020 {cite}`fogt_southern_2020`

This is a review article of the SAM, causes of its variability, and it's connections to other phenomena. It has a description of three types of SAM indices and a brief outline of some of the pros and cons - should be useful for determining how to characterise SAM.

If required, this article will help direct reseach in what influences the SAM phase and intensity (such as stratospheric connections, ENSO, Rossby wave breaking).

### Questions to answer

- What is the SAM?
- How does it affect Southern Hemisphere (SH) climate?
- What connections does it have to the wider SH circulation?

### Summary 

The SAM is a natural pattern of atmospheric circulation, an "internal mode of climate variability". In other words, humans have not caused the manifestation of this phenomenum. However, external (anthropogenic) forcings are causing the intensity and polarity of SAM phases to change. The primary forcing is ozone depletion, with greenhouse gas emissions and tropical sea surface temperatures having smaller impacts. This is generally driving the SAM into its positive phase for longer and more intense - possessing a greater SAM index value - periods. SAM is the largest contributor to atmospheric climate variability in the SH, at around 22-34%.

SAM practically covers the entirety of the extratropical SH. It effectively represents the pressure gradient between mid- and high-latitudes, and indicates the meridional position of the polar jet stream. It is largely zonally symmetric (symmetric across longitude bands) predominantly due to the lack of land mass effecting momentum transfer in the high latitudes of the SH. The poleward contribution of eddy momentum fluxes to the polar jet stream induces this symmetry, whereas other connections produce the spatial asymmetry that is observed, such as sea-surface temperature variability - linked to ENSO - and zonal wavenumber 3 (Fogt, Jones et al. 2012).

### Methods for Calculating a SAM Index

There are three methods outlined in this paper, the first of which is the method used by the author (may contain some bias in the claims of its effectiveness):
- First principal component of mean sea-level pressure (MSLP) or geopotential height from a regular gridded dataset.
    - It is claimed that this captures the zonal asymmetry inherent in SAM, whereas the following two methods do not.
- Difference of standardized zonal mean pressure between 40S and 65S (Gong & Wong 1999).
    - 40S and 65S chosen as they encapsulate the strongest anti-correlation (inverse) between the two oppositely signed pressure differentials.
- Similar to above, except that it uses pressure observations taken at stations at approximately 40S and 65S (Marshall 2003).

### Questions

- How does it affect storm tracks? Is it the governance over the location of westerly winds?
- What are the connections between SAM and ZW3? How does ZW3 cause asymmetry in SAM? -- Check out Fogt, Jones et al. 2012.


(Hoskins2005)=
## A New Perspective on Southern Hemisphere Storm Tracks, Hoskins & Hodges 2005 {cite}`hoskins_new_2005`

This article provides a detailed method for tracking storms using vorticity at a given geopotential height, in this case predominantly 250hPa and 850hPa. It uses a similar method to Trenberth 1991, in that it uses Euler variance methods on a band-filtered dataset (2-6 days) to analyse a variety of storm characteristics such as genesis/lysis (growth/decay), length of storm (lifetime), track, as well as mean attributes, such as intensity, growth/decay rate, speed. 

### Questions to answer

- What causes the storm track?
- What factors influence the position and topology of the storm track?
- What factors influence the storm characteristics?
- What are the trends associated with storm characteristics?
- How is the storm track linked to SAM and ZW3?

### Summary



### Questions

- What characteristics comprehensively characterise storms?
- What is the Euler variance method?
- What is vorticity and what are its implications?
