# Base State

It is well-established that model base state influences behaviour and subsequent performance {cite}`kidston_intermodel_2010`{cite}`palmer_response_1984`, hence any validation study must consider the base state climatology of relevant variables. To this end, we evaluate several key quantities relevant to storm track base state for each ensemble member to evaluate model representational accuracy. Alongside the analysis for individual models, the multi-model ensemble (MME) mean will be similarly analysed to establish whether the mean remains superior to any one model.
 
## Mean Meridional Position

Models are known to possess a bias in mean meridional position of the storm track {cite}`priestley_overview_2020`{cite}`kidston_intermodel_2010`. To briefly assess the quality of a models storm track representation, the peak in Z500 gradient was calculated by taking the derivative of the mean height time-and-zonal mean with respect to latitude (ERA-5: 52°S). Also identified was the peak in time-and-zonal mean high-frequency variance (ERA-5: 53°S). The relatively poleward position of the variance peak is interesting; it may be indicative of the poleward propagation of storms, a result of the zonal averaging of a storm track spiralling toward the pole {cite}`hoskins_new_2005`{cite}`sinclair_objective_1997`. Some models have a very prominent spectral pattern, present even after the smearing over effect of statistical averaging. Most prominent are CanESM5, NESM3 and MPI-ESM1.2 models, all of which possess spectral dynamical cores. The CSIRO modelling centre's two ACCESS models also display discontinuities, or rather superposed ridged waveforms, however, these are powered by a semi-implicit, semi-Lagrangian (SISL) dynamical core. Generally, the models perform well in representing the mean position of peak Z500 meridional gradient and peak high-frequency variance. Priestley et al. (2020) {cite}`priestley_overview_2020` find the impact of resolution is minimal in the SH, and this appears to be replicated here as no consistent relationship between model nominal resolution and mean state is apparent. 

There is a reasonably consistent relationship in the relative position of the two peaks; if the Z500 gradient peak has an equatorward bias, so too shall the variance peak. However, this is not always the case, for example FGOALS-f3-L Z500 gradient peak is much too equatorward at 49°S, whereas the variance peak is at 53°S, the same position as the reanalyses. All three EC-Earth3 models have similarly dispersed peaks, with the Z500 gradient peak at 51°S and the variance peak at 54°S. A few models, all of which have a nominal resolution of 250km, represent the mean state accurately to two significant figures -- ACCESS-CM2, ACCESS-ESM1-5, and NESM3 -- though the significance of this cannot be inferred. The MME mean is not the most representationally accurate in this case; both Z500 gradient and variance peaks are displaced 1° poleward of the reanalyses. Model internal variability uncertainties and ensemble uncertainty were not quantified, therefore whether the values fall within the uncertainty range cannot be verified.

## Spatial Variability and Seasonality

To investigate a model's capability in representing spatial variability in the two fields, we produce Taylor diagrams for both annual time series and for each season. These diagrams summarise four statistical quantities in a single diagram, namely the spatial correlation, $R$, centred root mean square difference (RMSD), $E'$, and the spatial standard deviations of the target (model) field, $\sigma_f$, and of a reference field, $\sigma_r$, in this case the ERA-5 reanalyses. For a full description of these diagrams and the relationship between the four qunatities, see the associated paper {cite}`taylor_summarizing_2001`. $R$ indicates how closely correlated each grid point is with the equivalent grid point of the reference field. $E'$ quantifies the difference, providing an idea of the scale of the correlation between the two fields otherwise missing from $R$. $\sigma_f$ quantifies the spatial variability of the target field. For a simpler presentation allowing both mean height and high-frequency variance fields to be plotted on the same diagram, $E'$ and $\sigma_f$ were normalised by the respective $\sigma_r$. 

Each model performed well overall annually and in all seasons for both fields, with high correlations and relatively low $E'$ in each case. Model performance was universally weaker for the variance field, though correlations were still above 0.95, whereas no model dropped below 0.99 for the mean height field. One area where models were considerably weaker however, was in representing high-frequency variance spatial variability -- each model underestimates variability, with some models' $\sigma_f$ being almost half that of ERA-5 (see Figure ?). Model performance in this regard was also fairly inconsistent, with a sizeable spread in the standard deviations annually and in all seasons. The MME mean was particularly strong in representing mean Z500 spatial variability, acheiving a $\sigma_f$ close to that of ERA-5. Correlation was lower than most models however, which is seems a sensible trade-off for improved spatial variability. Conversely, the MME mean possessed a stronger correlation for high-frequency variance, whereas $\sigma_f$ was affected by the generally poor ensemble performance, but retains 82% of the ERA-5 spatial variability. There was also a reduction in performance in the winter high-frequency variance field, with weaker correlations and greater $E'$ across the ensemble, whereas the spread of mean Z500 $\sigma_f$ appears to increase, though the significance of these changes were not tested. 

Aggregate $E'$ by season, found in Table 2, was used as a means of ranking model performance in capturing seasonality. This was performed for both fields with a rank applied, and average rank was calculated with equal weighting. Notably, the MME mean once again was not the best performing, but was in fact the ACCESS-ESM1.5 model. Both CSIRO models perform well in this regard, as do the GFDL models.

## Spatial Biases

Taylor diagrams are a useful means for quantifying representational accuracy of spatial variability without over-interpretation, however, regional biases, otherwise obscured in Taylor diagrams, remain of interest. To this end, the difference between time-averages of the mean Z500 field (with the seasonal cycle retained) and high-frequency variance field (with the seasonal cycle removed) and the equivalent ERA-5 fields were calculated, granting some insight into spatial biases. The model fields were subtracted from ERA-5 fields, such that a positive value indicates a higher reanalyses value (or negative bias), and negative values indicate a higher model value (or positive bias). Most models possessed biases on the order of $100m$ in the mean height field, and $3000m^2$ in the high-frequency variance field, although particularly good models were closer to $50m$ and $2000m^2$. Biases were generally evenly distributed about the reanalyses value, with few universal biases of the same sign. The spectral patterns produced by the CanESM5, NESM3 and MPI-ESM1.2 models -- as well as NorCPM1, despite seemingly having a finite volume dynamical core -- hinders interpretation of these fields. Both CSIRO models also appear pixelated, possibly something to do with their dynamical core -- though how this causes the spectral pattern is not obvious -- but they retain coherent signals. 

A variety of biases are apparent in the mean Z500 field, though most apparent is a general tendency, alternately-signed between models, toward a positively (negatively) biased region poleward of 55°S accompanied by an equatorward negatively (positively) biased region. Although these regions commonly exhibit a high-degree of zonal symmetry, they are by no means perfectly symmetrical, nor is this bias universal to all models. The result of this inconsistent, alternately-signed bias is the absence of such a region in the MME mean picture. Other recurring features exist such as a positive bias over the mid-Atlantic Ocean, and a negative bias off the south coast of Australia. Both these biases are also found in the MME mean, though to a smaller degree. There are a few other singular features unique to certain models which indicate potential defiencies; both models from NOAA's Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory exhibit a prominent zonal wavenumber-3 signal in the mean Z500 field, and FGOALS-f3-L has a very weak ASL. The MME mean field possesses smaller biases overall, as might be expected due to the averaging process, and these model-specific features fail to emerge.

Models display a near ubiquitous bias toward a lesser degree of high-frequency variance collocated with the expected storm track position. This is most prominent over the Atlantic and Indian oceans, where the ERA-5 reanalyses indicates there is a much stronger storm track. Over the south Pacific there is a weak bias, however, as shall be seen in both the composites and MCA results, CMIP6 models are poor at representing the asymmetrical component of the SAM, hence weaker storm activity over this same region is on the order of the models' zonally-symmetric estimation of storm track activity, hence there appears to be two compensating errors. This picture is found also in the MME mean high-frequency variance field; the negative bias over the mid-Atlantic is minimal, smoothed over in the averaging process, but the strongest bias remains in the Indian ocean.
