# CMIP6 Composites 

Composites were initially formed from a minimum of five observations, however, it was noted that composites with this number of observations possessed noticeable differences between sample periods (albeit with the same broad-scale picture). Therefore, the minimum was raised to 10 observations, reducing sensitivity to sample period. The annual composites, composed of around 25 observations, were almost universally alike. However, the sample size of seasonal ZW3 phase bins was frequently less than 20, hence number of observations used was lower than 10 by necessity. Composites were constructed from upper and lower quantiles with no specified minimum cut-off value. Given a sample size of less than 20 observations, the composites could include observations with small ZW3 magnitudes, hence many other signals, such as the SAM, could dominate circulation anomalies and obscure a ZW3 signal. This makes the seasonal ZW3 composites fairly unreliable. As such, they will be discussed only briefly, and at only the broadest scale.

Models with spectral dynamical cores were smoothed with a 9-point weighted average function before plotting as the raw contours were occasionally illegible. The effect of these models was also apparent in the ensemble mean, hence the same smoothing function was also applied to this.

## SAM

### Annual

The broad strokes of a canonical SAM signal are present in all model mean height annual composites -- possessing the central polar region and surrounding broken annulus. The overly zonally-symmetric models maintain this tendency, many more represent an asymmetric polar region. Some appear to exaggerate this asymmetry, though this may well fall within natural sample variation. Most models have the three expected maxima in the mid-latitude ocean basins, but the models tend to push the two maxima in the Atlantic and Pacific too far into the western hemisphere, reminiscent of a summer signal. Occasionally, a ZW4 signal is present. In a number of models, the ASL region is particularly prominent -- a feature identified in ERA-5 seasonal composites in particular. 

The approximate annulus of modified storm activity surrounding the pole is present in all HF variance annual composites. However, in the ERA-5 results, regions of modified storm activity tend to be closely associated with extrema in the mean height field, but this behaviour is not generally replicated here -- there are frequently regions not clearly connected with any feature in the mean height field. This would suggest there is a disconnect between the two fields, _contrary to MCA results?_ There was a stark hemispheric mirroring in location of modified storm activity in the reanalyses, see Figure (?) in chapter 1; this was not replicated in the model results. CMCC-ESM2 almost exactly replicates the ERA-5 composites in the mean height field, similarly, but to a lesser extent, in the HF variance field, though this is likely happenstance. Maximum anomaly magnitude closely matches the reanalyses in all model composites, in the mean height field particularly, suggesting the models simulate the strength of SAM events quite well. Some models possess half the maximum HF variance anomaly magnitude, and do not directly scale with mean height anomalies, although this was not uncommon in the reanalyses.

### Seasonal

Similar behaviour is found in the seasonal composites, with comparable maximum anomalies and dissociated modifed storm activity. A ZW4 signal in the mid-latitudes of the mean height field is much more prevalent in the DJF composites than any other season -- though some models retain the ZW3 signal -- in line with previous results. There are some significant asymmetries in the polar region, with prominent ASL regions and protrusions over the ocean basins not uncommon. The HF variance annulus is no more broken in winter than in summer, contrary to well-established results. This could be due to the small sample size not adequately capturing the climatological mean. The apparent organisation of the storm track does generally reach a minimum in autumn, however, and retains more structure in spring, as in the reanalyses. Models with a particularly prominent zonal-symmetry generally exhibit this bias across the seasons, with smaller fluctuations than typically seen across the rest of the ensemble. Whereas, those with exaggerated asymmetrical features -- features which are also quite apparent in the ERA-5 results -- commonly also identify a more asymmetrical picture in the covariance maps. 

### MME Mean

The ensemble mean performs very well for both annual and seasonal composites. All canonical features were identified, including a sensible looking asymmetrical component. Seasonality is well-captured, with a highly symmetrical polar anomalous region in summer, and ZW4-like in the mid-latitudes. In winter, the A-SAM is clearly apparent, and a more ZW3 signal in the mid-latitudes. The maximum anomaly magnitude was on a level with observations in the annual composite, also present are heightened anomalies in winter and relatively weaker ones in summer. There are two aspects where the ensemble mean differ considerably from ERA-5: the ERA-5 maximum anomalies in the winter upper composite exceeded |$4000m^2$|, four times greater than any anomaly found in the MME mean; throughout all composites there is the persistent bias toward an all too symmetrical, coherent storm track. In the ERA-5 seasonal composites, the storm track response to the mean height field is highly non-linear, with much less organised structure. It's possible that both discrepancies may be due to the differing derivation -- an extreme value of the kind described may have been obscured in the ensemble averaging process, so too will the averaging smooth over a noisy signal of the kind found in Figure 1.12.

## ENSO 

### Annual

Performance is variable across the ensemble for both annual and seasonal composites. The teleconnection is identified by most models, however the general shape, location, and extent is inconsistent, whilst CanESM5 fails to identify the signal. Most models correctly identify general characteristics -- the sub-tropical Pacific high band in the mid-latitudes, and ASL. The trailing high over the Atlantic is missing from a number of models. Many others have a more summer-like signal, with the same region extending further zonally to the Indian Ocean, and the associated modified storm activity in the HF variance. The ASL region is highly variable; some models suggest this region is a deep low, extending over entire Pacific (see SAM0-UNICON in Figure 2.? for example), whilst others isolate it to a smaller, shallower region (see EC-Earth3-AerChem).

### Seasonal 

There is generally inconsistent representation of seasonality. ACCESS-CM2 and ACCESS-ESM1-5 are inconsistent, with hardly discernable signals throughout the seasons. Mostly, the ASL region is present, however, other typical features are more often missing. The canonical seasonal signals, such as the SAM-like summer, are not present, but occasionally appears in other seasons. BCC-CSM2-MR more consistently exhibits the teleconnection signal, but spring is poor, with a weaker than expected signal and lack of the characteristic signal. CMCC-CM2-SR5 is similar, but lacks the SAM-like summer signal and underestimates SON amplitude, whilst CMCC-ESM2 is marginally better in spring, but does capture the summer signal. EC-Earth3 captures the summer signal and relative strengths quite well, but is inconsistent in exhibiting a canonical signal across the seasons, winter being particularly poor. CESM2 and CESM2-WACCM is have consistently discernable teleconnection signals, however the magnitude of maximum composite anomalies are questionable. CESM2 peaks in summer El Ninos at over $100m$, much greater than any seen in ERA-5, whereas CESM2-WACCM peaks in MAM, approximately 30% greater than SON. NESM3 performs well generally, but has abnormally strong magnitude in the winter El Nino composite, over |$120m$|. NorESM2-MM is highly variable in its location of the ASL, and the summer signal is absent, however the SON spatial structure and amplitude is captured well. El Nino composites typically have a higher maximum amplitude than La Ninas across the ensemble, in agreement with the skew toward stronger El Nino events.

### MME Mean

The ensemble mean captures well both the general characteristics of the ENSO teleconnection in both feilds, as well as its seasonality, see Figure 2.?. It has a weaker magnitude than ZW3 and SAM composites in both fields, _is this seen in ERA5? Or could this be because of the inconsistent ensemble performance dampening the magnitude?_ The canonical signal in the annual composites is identified, as it is in the seasonal composites, with fluctuations in magnitude between seasons. The teleconnection is strongest in spring, and most SAM-like in summer. The Rossby wave train pattern is missing from the winter composite, contrary to \citet{karoly_southern_1989}, but in agreement with other results in this study (see Figure 1.12).

## ZW3

Some composites were still only composed of 6 or so composites, given that the sample size could be as low as 12 observations. If the sample size was less than 20, the composites were split equally into upper and lower halves. Where there was an uneven number of observations in the sample (N), the number of observations taken was N/2 - 0.5 for both upper and lower composites. 

### Annual

All models capture the expected ZW3 signal in the annual composites, with co-aligned highs and lows. Figure 2.? shows the phase bin 120 to 180 as an example. There appears to be an exaggerated high in the Pacific in many models for this phase. This is a feature of some of the ERA-5 phase bin composites, but not consistent across all phase bins, hence this may be due to sample variation. In the same 120 to 180 phase bin this is not observed, however, due to the ZW3 index calculation, it cannot be said with certainty that this is a discrepancy between ERA-5 and model output -- since PCs are arbitrarily assigned a direction, it may be that ERA-5 PCs and model PCs are unaligned, hence phase bins may also be unaligned. As noted earlier, highs and lows in the Pacific are likely to be given too much weight in the ZW3 index magnitude calculation, which may also play a role in this case.

There is clear evidence of the same signal discussed above, associated with an extrema in the mean height field are two regions in the HF variance field, one equatorward of the opposite sign, one poleward of the same sign. This is still an inconsistent occurrence, many mean Z500 extrema have no associated HF variance regions, although these tend to be weaker. Frequently there is a modification of storm activity equatorward (with the correct alignment), but no associated region poleward, and vice versa. This suggests there is a connection between the two fields, but which can be interupted by other factors, such as internal noise. 

CESM-WACCM is notable for its indistinct signal; there is the correct outline, and collocated HF variance regions, however the magnitude is clearly much weaker than for other models. 

### Seasonal 

Seasonal composites -- Are there obviously higher magnitude mean height anomalies in spring?

### MME Mean

The ensemble mean is fairly representative of individual models, with approximately the same maximum magnitude both annually and by season. The summer composite is weaker, but the difference is much less exaggerated than for the reanalyses. Winter and spring are also of comparable magnitude, as is found in the covariance maps also, possibly indicating the seasonality of Rossby wave propagation is not adequately captured by all models. However, these composites are an average of model seasonal composites composed of few observations. As noted above, due to the restricted sample size, other modes of variability may dominate circulation anomalies. Although this will be compensated for in the ensemble averaging, the effect of mixing signals is a likely cause of diminished mean height anomalies.
