# Chapter 2 Conclusion

In this study, we have considered output from the CMIP6 programme to assess model performance in representing the SH storm track and associated large-scale modes of variability. We characterised model base state, and applied a similar analysis to that conducted on the ERA-5 reanalyses; namely an MCA, covariance and composite analysis to provide insight into representational accuracy. We find CMIP6 models successfully represent general storm track characteristics, with the hitherto seen equatorward bias compensated. Small poleward biases in the MME mean for both zonal-and-time-mean HF variance and mean height gradient meridional peaks were found instead, although neither were statistically significant. There was a considerable negative bias in the Indian Ocean storm track present in many of the models, which persists in the ensemble mean. This bias subsequently had a sizeable effect on the metrics used to quantify spatial variability and seasonality in the HF variance field.

Models generally perform well in simulating the broad-scale picture of each studied phenomena. The SAM emerges as the leading mode of the MCA in all models for the annual series, seasonally this was more variable -- occasionally the SAM was not the leading mode. Despite the negative skew in the SAMI, most models performed well in the covariance and composite analysis. However, the frequency distribution of the model-derived SAM indices should be the subject of future investigation. The asymmetrical component of SAM (A-SAM) is inconsistently represented, with various model-specific characteristics identifiable across the ensemble, such as the anomalously deep region over the Amundsen Sea in FGOALS-f3-L and the zonally-symmetric SAM in both CSIRO models. These fluctuations are largely accounted for in the ensemble mean, which exhibits a seasonal cycle faithful to ERA-5. However, the storm track is consistently too broad and exhibits a coherence over the Pacific not identified in observational results, which is also identifiable in the MME mean picture, see Figures \ref{fig:mme-annual-sam-cov} and \ref{fig:mme-seasonal-sam-cov}. 

Many models possessed a particular weakness in representing the ENSO teleconnection. A spatial pattern reminiscent of the teleconnection was usually retrieved in the second or third mode, however, there was much less consistency and was missing for some models. Although the canonical ASL is typically located in the Pacific, in both covariance maps and composites, the exact location wanders zonally between models and between seasons. The shape and extent of the region was also quite variable, so too the appearance of other canonical teleconnection features, such as the sub-tropical high band and Atlantic trailing high of the mean height field. This inconsistent representation translates into the HF variance field, with a frequently indiscernable canonical teleconnection signal. As noted by \citet{fogt_decadal_2006} and others, ENSO exhibits decadal variability which may be inadequately sampled in this relatively limited period, which could explain differences between observations and models. Whether these discrepancies are due to poor model performance or inadequate sampling of ENSO variability has not been ascertained. 

ZW3 is similarly well-represented by models for annual data, however, the limited sample for both CMIP6 output and ERA-5 prevents thorough investigation of seasonal fidelity. The repeated identification of a physically sensible signal in the unrotated MCA, covariance and composite analyses lends support to a coherent connection between the two fields -- one that cannot be established from the reanalyses alone. A proposed connection is as such: westerlies flowing around a ZW3 low are directed equatorward, causing higher mean velocities and greater baroclinic instabilities, resulting in increased equatorward and reduced poleward storm activity. This signal is by no means universal, suggesting other factors interfere to obscure such a linear relationship. This is also an indication the effect of ZW3 on the storm track is less important than SAM and ENSO, at least on monthly timescales. Further research is needed for any conclusion to be drawn.

Overall, the ensemble mean appears superior in consistency and overall representational accuracy, with a particularly dominant performance in capturing phenomenal seasonality. The CMIP6 models are of generally high fidelity to the ERA-5 reanalyses, however, the ensemble mean remains a better reproducer of storm track characteristics and the phenomena studied here. A sub-sample of the best performing models has been selected for an investigation into projections of storm track climatology.
