# Indices Comparison

The mean, quartiles and spread of the phenomena indices calculated from model output were compared with those from observations. This should provide some insight into the distribution of average events as well as frequency of extreme events. The quartiles and fences are referred to by the general term "distribution". The time series were not linearly detrended before an average was calculated.

## SAM Index

Agreement between CMIP6 models and ERA-5 reanalyses is fairly good, with all models returning an average magnitude of 0 +/- 0.2 standard deviations. There is a small negative skew in the ERA-5 observations -- a marginally negative average value -- though not enough to be significant, and no model deviates from this picture. Maximum values lie somewhere between +/- 3.5, although some models possessed events with a magnitude greater than 4 standard deviations from the mean, namely SAM0-UNICON, CESM-WACCM and FGOALS-f3-L. There is a general tendency for a skew in extreme events, with models favouring either highly positive or negative SAMI magnitudes. Models also generally possess more extreme values than the reanalyses. In general, models perform well in capturing the overall magnitude (and spatial variation to some degree, given this was calculated from an EOF analysis) of SAM events.

## SOI

Due to a difference in derivation procedure, the SOI retrieved from NOAA differs from model output in magnitude, however the same procedure was followed, with the resulting index time series normalised in the usual way. This means covariances are of a smaller magnitude, but does not impact index distribution, nor the magnitude of the MCA or composites. All models have an average value around 0, a result of the normalisation. The expected negative skew toward El Nino events is represented well by most models. A few models lack this characteristic -- NorCPM1, GFDL-ESM4. There is a general low frequency of extreme events -- particularly NorESM2-MM, NESM3, CMCC-CM2-SR5 -- which could be due to a poorly sampled distribution (small sample size), but the whole ensemble exhibits this tendency. Note: this may mean the ENSO composites are lower in magnitude, and the characteristics may be less prominent than in ERA-5 -- something to check out.

## ZW3 

Zonal wave 3 is particularly well represented -- average magnitude and phase,distributions and frequency of extreme events are comparable to ERA-5, with few exceptions. The first two EOFs were inspected to ensure both possessed ZW3 patterns. Goyal et al. (2022) found one or both of the leading EOFs for GFDL-CM4 and FGOALS-f3-L were ZW4 in nature, however, this was not apparent in this analysis. Therefore, all models' indices were considered valid characterisations of ZW3. ERA-5 and all models have an average magnitude of 1.2 +/- 0.1. Two models possess outliers of magnitude of 5 and above, NESM3 and CanESM5. Each model had an average phase of 0 degrees, the same as the reanalyses. 