# Maximum Covariance Analysis -- CMIP6 Comparison

The MCA on the ERA-5 reanalyses suggested the impact of ENSO on the higher latitudes was regional, limited to the Pacific with a diminishing westward-propagating Rossby wave that all but disappears over the Atlantic. Interpretation of ENSO teleconnection signals retrieved from the CMIP6 MCA will therefore be limited to this region, and regions of co-variability outside of this will be largely ignored/attributed to other effects.

## Annual Data 

### Mode 1

All CMIP6 leading modes retreived exhibit a strong SAM-like signal in line with that retreived from the ERA-5 reanalyses. Generally, there is a broad, well-defined and highly zonally-symmetric annulus in the high-frequency variance field, in contrast to the ERA-5 leading mode, which is much more diffuse, and has a larger asymmetrical component. SCF is mostly higher than the reanalyses; the mean SCF was a percentage point higher at 10.7%, which may be due to the more symmetrical character of the simulated storm track. Some models do manage to simulate a more diffuse annulus, which also tends to coincide with a lower SCF, comparable to ERA-5. Correlation between the PCs was also generally higher -- but of similar magnitude to the reanalyses -- inline with the higher SCF, i.e., those models with high leading SCF also had high PC correlation values.

Most models successfully depict the largely circular mean Z500 anomalous region over the pole, with sizeable asymmetrical components. There is little consensus on the nature of the asymmetrical component however, but most find the region has three protruding arms -- a picture not uncommon in the reanalyses, however, the ERA-5 annual series presents this region at its most symmetrical. The majority of models successully represent the superposed three mean Z500 anomalies maxima in the ocean basins, though it is not uncommon for the co-variability to be larger than that found in the reanalyses, or for the three maxima to be missing. The ASL is a region of variable model performance, frequently a location of considerable co-variability in the mean height field singular vector. In the ERA-5 high-frequency variance singular vector there is minimal co-variability in this region, however, there is an almost universal model tendency toward sizeable co-variability here.

NorESM2-MM is particularly representative of the ERA-5 picture, with a more diffuse annulus, minimal co-variability over the Pacific and three ocean basin maxima. However, SCF explained is only 8.6% and a broad maximum in high-frequency variance is identified over the south Atlantic as opposed to the Indian Ocean. The CSIRO ACCESS-CM2 and ACCESS-ESM1.5 models both possess a much higher SCF, at 13.4% and 12.2%. ACCESS-ESM1.5 does perform well in representing the spatial characteristics identified in the ERA-5 study however, in spite of considerable co-variability in the mid-latitude mid-Pacific. The EC-Earth Consortium models possess comparable SCF, but tend to exaggerate the asymmetrical component in the mean height field. FGOALS-f3-L has greatly exaggerated co-variability over the mid-latitude Pacific in both singular vectors, as well as possessing too high a SCF at 11.6%.

### Mode 2

The second mode is more variable in the retrieved signal; there was an even split between an ENSO teleconnection and ZW3 signal. Some models perform very well; a canonical teleconnection picture can be found in EC-Earth3 for example (Figure (?)). In those models that do identify the ENSO teleconnection in the high-frequency variance singular vector, it is often displaced westward of the location identified for reanalyses. However, that location varied considerably in the ERA-5 MCA, frequently zonally-displaced depending on the dataset used, and even arising in different locations for different modes of the same dataset. Therefore, teleconnection location is likely a function of the sample period used, and the sample size may be insufficient to identify the true climatological location of the teleconnection. There is also frequently a superposed ZW3 signal in the mean height field, as mentioned in the previous chapter, separating these closely interconnected phenomena may be impossible with an MCA. However, where a clear teleconnection signal is present, the co-varying region in the high-frequency variance field is always collocated with an oppositely-signed ASL-like region, see BCC-CSM2-MR in Figure (?) for instance.

In those models with ZW3 signals, an ENSO teleconnection signal is frequently found in the third mode. One example being ACCESS-ESM1.5 -- the teleconnection emerges in the third mode, albeit as a component of another ZW3 signal, see Figure (?) --  with other models, including GFDL-CM4 and NESM3, displaying the same behaviour. EC-Earth3 is quite accurate, with two perpendicular oppositely-signed regions in the Pacific -- in the subtropics and mid-latitudes -- in the mean height field, with an associated prominent region in the variance field collocated with the boundary between the two (see Figure (?)). These features, along with the weaker ZW3 signal, is closely aligned with the picture identified in the ERA-5 analysis.

SCF of the second mode is of comparable magnitude to ERA-5 across the ensemble; a few percentage points less than the leading mode, although this is exaggerated in those models with large SCF in the first mode. Correlation between the second mode PCs fluctuates much more than the reanalyses, but remains of roughly the same magnitude. There is no clear relationship between PC correlation and whether the signal is teleconnection-like or ZW3. For many modes, the two signals are strongly entwined and impossible to separate -- _possibly due to a systemic overly strong propagation of Rossby waves, something to check out in the covariance maps and composites_. For some models, clearly separated ZW3 signals in the second mode possess significantly lower PC correlation, and a higher correlation in following mode where a clear teleconnection signal is present, as in ACCESS-ESM1.5 (Figure (?)). However, this is reversed for other models, such as NESM3 (Figure (?)), whilst others are of similar magnitudes.

### Higher Order Modes

When the EOFs are unrotated, ZW3 is extremely dominant in the higher order modes, near ubiquitous for all models. Commonly found are regions coherently aligned in both fields -- where a mean height field maximum exists, there is an equatorward oppositely-signed high-frequency variance region, and a second smaller poleward region of the same sign. An ENSO teleconnection-like signal is frequently found to be the third mode, but is also found in some of the higher order modes, the fourth mode of CanESM5, for example. _Tentative: The existence of these coherent regions may lend support to theory of how ZW3 affects the storm track._ Whereas, when the first 10 EOFs are rotated, these ZW3 signals disappear and in their place ENSO teleconnection-like and ZW4 signals appear more often. Also, the ENSO teleconnection is much better separated from ZW3 when the orthogonality constraint is dropped. _Why would this be? Could it be that models generally allow too strong a propagation of Rossby waves, hence the presence of so many ZW3 signals? But then, why would they disappear when the EOFs are rotated? The ZW3 signals were of varying phase, so surely they can't be absorbed into SAM and ENSO-teleconnection signals?_

### MME Mean

The MME mean leading mode is not the expected SAM-like pattern, but is a diffuse negative co-variability in both singular vectors covering almost the whole field from the pole to 30degreeS, accounting for greater covariance with an SCF of 15.5%. The PC correlation is also much lower than for any individual model, at only 0.48, and SCF is generally lower for higher order modes than ERA-5. Considered together, this suggests CMIP6 models internal noise has been smoothed over and the leading mode arises as a result of statistical averaging. The SAM-like signal arises in the second mode, with another limited asymmetrical component. The ENSO teleconnection is apparent in the third mode, and much of the co-variability is limited to the Pacific, similar to ERA-5 results. This suggests an MCA may not be appropriate to apply to a ensemble mean.

## Seasonal Data

The following section describes some of the characteristics of seasonal MCA, however, no figures are presented. SCF is generally higher for models in annual and seasonal data. There is frequently a large range of values -- which, given the dependence of SCF on sample size, may stabilise with a larger sample -- but with a positive skew, i.e., the upper bound difference from ERA-5 is greater.

The expected SAM-like signal is identified exclusively in the leading mode. Every model successfully represents the high-frequency variance ring typical of summer, though some retain a more diffuse appearance. Many models capture the minimal co-variability over the sub-tropical Pacific. A ZW4 signal is commonly found in the mean height field, superposed on the SAM-like signal for example -- this is representative of the picture identified in the ERA-5, but the fourth maximum over the Pacific is often more prominent, see CESM2-WACCM in Figure (?) (_Note: am I including any figures for this section?_) -- whilst other models retain a ZW3 signal. Summer has greater SCF than the annual series, however, it is a slightly exaggerated fraction relative to ERA-5. The CSIRO models especially exaggerate the SCF, at 21.0% and 16.5%, but the patterns retrieved are quite accurate. Most models do not have such an extreme fraction, and others even retain a smaller fraction, with CESM2 explaining a SCF of 8.6%. The reanalyses' second mode in summer has little apparent structure, with only an impression of a propagating Rossby train in the Pacific, with much lower SCF than the leading mode. The models are largely faithful to this picture, with a variety of signals emerging including ZW4, others with little discernible structure. A vague ENSO teleconnection signal is retrieved by some models, though rarely, and constitutes minimal SCF. This is likely due to the poor Rossby wave propagation in summer dampening the teleconnection and ZW3 signals.

The ENSO teleconnection arises in the winter leading mode in five models, others identify a SAM signal. The ERA-5 leading two modes are of very similar SCF, so the misidentification might be explained in this way, however, this is not generally the case for the models -- most models have well-seperated modes. If the SAM is identified in the first mode, the second mode generally exhibits an ENSO teleconnection signal, and vice versa, with few exceptions. In the exceptions found, the two Norwegian models, NorCPM1 and NorESM2-MM, fail to identify the SAM entirely, whilst the EC-Earth3 model with an explicit carbon cycle, EC-Earth3-CC, fails to identify an ENSO teleconnection signal. As with the annual MCA, the Pacific locations of the strong co-varying regions of both fields are quite variable, but remain coherently aligned. SCF is generally higher than the reanalyses, although this is notably not the case for the CSIRO models, which have comparable SCF in contrast with the above results.

In spring, a SAM-like signal is retrieved in the leading mode for each model, however, many exaggerate the zonal symmetry in both fields. SCF is of approximately equal magnitude to ERA-5, but with a range of values between 7.0% and 12.4% (_Note: might remove this, or include it for all the other sections where this is also the case_). A ZW3 signal is prominent in many of the models, superposed on the SAM-like structure, coinciding with the season of strongest Rossby wave propagation from the sub-tropics. A majority of models identify the teleconnection as spring's second mode -- 12 exhibit a clear signal. Many others have a vague signal, though these cannot be distinguished from a wider ZW3 pattern. Autumn, similar to winter, retrieves both SAM and ENSO teleconnection signals in the leading mode, but whilst the other pattern is consistently identified in the following summer mode, both signals are relegated to lower modes in a number of models. For example, CanESM5 and NorCPM1 retrieve a SAM-like pattern in the third mode, whilst CMCC-CM2-SR5 and NorESM2-MM exhibit the teleconnection, with those signals missing from the leading two modes. This may indicate models underestimate some of the organised variability still present in the autumn months.

ZW3 is a common occurence in the higher order modes of all seasons except summer, appearing even in a number of models' second modes in autumn and spring -- a trend also found in ERA-5, where winter and spring possess many ZW3 signals. 

## Possible Notes for the Conclusion

Models are too zonally-symmetric in their representation of the storm track, as defined by the high-frequency variance field, and although there is improvement in the magnitude of the SAM asymmetrical component, there is little consensus on the spatial structure.

As was seen in the previous chapter, an ENSO teleconnection signal in the second mode fairly consistently across annual and seasonal datasets. However, an MCA on CMIP6 models often failed to identify the ENSO teleconnection as a prominent mode of co-variability, with a only a 50-50 hit rate for annual data. 

A ZW3 signal is frequently present in the MCA singular vectors, present even in modes which are clearly the SAM or an ENSO teleconnection, and near-ubiquitous in the higher order modes. This is significantly different to ERA-5, where ZW3 was identified, but with much less frequently, and less consistently on monthly timescales. This may indicate that models have a systematic bias toward overly strong Rossby wave propagation.

SCF is generally higher for models in annual and seasonal data. Frequently a large range of values, but with a positive skew, i.e., the upper bound is further from ERA-5.

## Most Accurate Models

 - ACCESS-CM2
 - ACCESS-ESM1-5
 - CESM2
 - CMCC-ESM2
 - CMCC-CM2-SR5
 - NorESM2-MM
 - EC-Earth3
 - GFDL-CM4
 - GFDL-ESM4
 - FGOALS-f3-L

NorESM2-MM is not consistent across seasons, performing pretty poorly in autumn and spring.

EC-Earth3-CC and EC-Earth3-AerChem are pretty poor all round.