# Selecting Sub-Sample

Almost all models performed strongly in the base state analysis. There was, however, variable model performance in two areas in particular: representing spatial variability in the HF variance field; and identifying the meridional peak position of mean height gradient and HF variance fields. HF variance spatial standard deviation had a range of values, between 61.4% and 107.0% that of ERA-5, but generally the spatial variability was weaker across the ensemble. The storm track equatorward bias does appear to have been corrected in this generation of models, however, a number of models locate the storm track 2-3° either equatorward or poleward of the renalyses value. Because the performance across the ensemble was generally strong, preference is given to those models accurately representing magnitude and spatial structure of both fields' response to large-scale variability.

The two CSIRO models, ACCESS-CM2 and ACCESS-ESM1-5, perform well in the metric for capturing seasonality, aggregate $E'$ in both fields, and match exactly the meridional peak location of the height gradient and HF variance field. They also perform strongly in capturing spatial correlation and variability of the HF variance field, with correlations of 0.994 and 0.995, and a normalised standard deviation 83.9% and 92.2%, respectively. However, they generally represent both the SAM and the storm track as too zonally symmetrical, across seasons also, and do not exhibit as much non-linearity as expected. ENSO and ZW3 are generally well-represented, but with a more inconsistent performance in ENSO seasonality. Both models exhibit the negative HF variance spatial bias over the Indian Ocean, as well as the negative mean height bias over Tasmania (see the MME Mean spatial biases in Figure (?) for reference). 

BCC-CSM2-MR differs from other models in its spatial biases and its overestimation of HF variance spatial variability. BCC-CSM2-MR has a positive bias over the South American and Antarctic peninsulas -- a region of heightened cyclogenesis downstream of the Andes, indicating it may overestimate the number of storms generated in this region. It is also one of only two models, the other being NESM3, to overestimate HF variance spatial variability, at 107.0% of the reanalyses. Performance is generally strong representing the field responses to variability phenomena, except the mean height response to the ENSO teleconnection -- the extremum over the mid-latitude Pacific wanders considerably between the seasons, hence it is largely absent in the annual covariance map (see Figure (?)).

CESM2 and CESM2-WACCM are quite accurate representing peak positions, though are weaker at capturing seasonality. They perform well capturing HF variance spatial correlation and variability, correlations of 0.990 and 0.989, and a normalised standard deviation 80.4% and 82.4%, respectively. They are fairly accurate representing all phenomena, including capturing the asymmetrical SAM component, but also exhibit those biases found in the ensemble mean, as well as a negative mean height bias over the Amundsen Sea -- two of the strongest biases across the ensemble. 

FGOALS-f3-L generally performs well, apart from the considerable positive bias over the ASL, which was identifiable in results from most of the analysis -- covariance in the mean Z500 field over this region is noticeably stronger than any other model for SAM and ENSO, which corresponds to heightened storm track activity, and the ASL is prominent in both rotated and unrotated MCA leading modes. Seasonality and HF variance spatial variability was relatively weaker than other models. NESM3 is the other model lacking the Indian Ocean bias, performing well in capturing seasonality, spatial variability, and generally capturing canonical signals in the mean height field in response to the various modes of variability. It is notably one of the more consistent models capturing seasonality of the ENSO teleconnection.

GFDL-CM4 and GFDL-ESM4 are similar in their performance, generally representing the phenomena and capturing seasonality. Interestingly, both exhibit a ZW3-like pattern in the mean height field bias. GFDL-CM4 has a much weaker HF variance bias over the Indian Ocean, but the mean height field has a particularly strong negative bias over the south coast of Tasmania. SAM0-UNICON is fairly consistent in representing all aspects of the phenomena, and possesses a spatial variability very similar to ERA-5, with a present, but greatly diminished Indian Ocean bias. The SAM0-UNICON model is reasonably accurate in demarcating the storm track position. Although the variance peak is located 2 degrees south of ERA-5, the maximum magnitude is similar. CMCC-ESM2, CMCC-CM2-SR5 and EC-Earth3 are representative of much of the ensemble, with middling performance, and some inconsistency in exhibiting identifiable signals in the covariance and composite analysis, but generally perform reasonably well.

CanESM5 was unique in this ensemble, operating on a coarser nominal resolution at 500km, and its performance was noticeably weaker across all aspects of the analysis. MPI-ESM-1-2-HAM and HadGEM3-GC31-MM were generally poor in representing HF variance spatial variability and seasonality, and meridional peaks possessed equatorward biases of 1-3°. Although the retrieved MCA modes were representative of the ERA-5 results, A-SAM was generally exaggerated across annual and seasonal covariance maps and composites. Covariance magnitude and spatial distribution with the SOI was also too weak. NorCPM1, as well as MPI-ESM-1-2-HAM and HadGEM3-GC31-MM, was greatly affected by a systematic HF variance negative bias in the Indian Ocean, and similarly performed poorly in seasonality and spatial variability. The two variations of the EC-Earth3 model, with explicit aerosol chemistry, EC-Earth3-AerChem, and an explicit carbon cycle, EC-Earth3-CC, similarly exaggerating A-SAM, particularly over the ASL. They also poorly represent the seasonal ENSO teleconnection, occasionally not identifying the ASL. NorESM2-MM is inconsistent across all aspects of the analysis, capturing aspects of the phenomena well, particularly A-SAM, but frequently is off the mark. It also possesses a strong HF variance bias in the Indian Ocean, and performs poorly in seasonality and spatial variability. 

Sub-Sample:

 - ACCESS-CM2
 - ACCESS-ESM1-5
 - BCC-CSM2-MR
 - CESM2-WACCM
 - CMCC-ESM2
 - EC-Earth3
 - GFDL-CM4
 - FGOALS-f3-L
 - SAM0-UNICON
 - NESM3
