
Storm track strength and location is associated with the polar jet through the Coriolis force and thermal wind relation, which are in turn affected by sea ice extent. This momentum transfer plays an important role in reducing the temperature gradient between the equator and the poles, any change to which could see serious consequences. Reductions in sea ice will weaken the temperature gradient between the equator and the poles, leading to lower mean westerly flow velocities in accordance with the thermal wind relation. This will likely reduce the baroclinic instability from which storms form, potentially reducing storm incidence hence momentum transfer poleward -- a potential negative feedback. 

- It is suggested that the reason for the higher variance in the Indian ocean is due to the Antarctic landmass extending to much lower latitudes in this sector, and in turn the sea ice has a further extent, {cite}`hoskins_new_2005`. This modulates the temperature gradient, by maintaining a lower temperature at lower latitudes, hence the gradient between the equator and Antarctica is greater. The thermal wind relation indicates the jet stream over this sector is stronger, hence there are greater instabilities translating into more frequent storms. The opposite is true over the Pacific sector, where the Antarctic landmass does not extend far north, hence there is generally a lower incidence of storms. This is a climatological mean state, but which relates strongly to the Antarctic sea ice extent. A reduction in the sea ice could lead to a shallower temperature gradient, a weaker polar jet and fewer storms, which would seriously affect global circulation patterns.