# Introduction to Projections Chapter

The global climate is a complex system; a web of tensions and feedbacks that make its
evolution difficult to predict. The Earth's climate tends toward a state of
equilibrium, however, human-induced changes, known as anthropogenic forcings, have 
caused a shift in the basic state. Primarily, CO2 emissions are altering the chemical 
make-up of the atmosphere, in turn leading to an altered radiative budget -- the sum 
total of incoming and outgoing radiation at the top of the atmosphere, also known as 
a radiative forcing. As the climate tends toward a new state of equilibrium, there 
will be unknown consequences for other components of the Earth system, including 
atmospheric circulation patterns. The storm track directly influences global 
circulation patterns, as well as properties of synoptic eddies which can severely 
impact human lives and livelihoods(see section \ref{intro1}). Storm track 
characteristics exhibit trends over the historical record. A number of studies 
suggest there has been a poleward movement of the mean storm track position 
\citep{pena-ortiz_observed_2013,manney_seasonal_2018}, and a general increase in the 
number of strong extratropical storms \citep{reboita_trend_2015,
wang_inter-comparison_2016}. \citet{toggweiler_midlatitude_2006} highlight the 
relationship between oceanic overturning circulation, CO2 uptake and strength of the 
westerlies. They investigate historic ice ages and link higher (lower) deep ocean CO2 
content to cooler (warmer) climates and a weaker (stronger) westerly jet. 
\citet{kaplan_patagonian_2016} use proxies to identify a connection between mean 
temperature and a wandering storm track in a study on the holocene period. A poleward 
storm track \citep{kidston_intermodel_2010,chang_projected_2017} and increased 
extreme storm frequency trends \citep{chang_cmip5_2012} are projected by models to 
continue in a warming climate. However, AR6 synthesises multiple lines of evidence 
and concludes though these changes are likely, there is low confidence 
\citep{gulev_changing_2021}. 

Changes in magnitude and spatial structure to large-scale modes of variability will 
also have significant impacts, as they have a strong influence on regional weather. 
For example, precipatition trends along the west coast of the US with ENSO events. 
The SAM has exhibited a positive trend over the past several decades, driven by 
increased atmospheric greenhouse gas concentrations (GGCs) and stratospheric 
ozone depletion. The recovering Antarctic ozone hole, which has been the primary 
driver of the positive trend \citep{thompson_signatures_2011}, introduces another 
uncertainty as some studies find the trend has ceased since 2000 
\citep{banerjee_pause_2020}. However, continuing greenhouse gas emissions are 
expected to push the positive trend \citep{fogt_southern_2020,arblaster_future_2011}. 
AR5 and AR6 note several studies suggest ENSO variability has been higher in recent 
decades than the previous few centuries \citep{grothe_enhanced_2020,
mcgregor_unified_2010,mcgregor_inferred_2013}, although confidence is low. There has 
been little indication about how the teleconnection will change, but the expanding 
tropics and increased SSTs are expected to affect anomalous convection driving the 
teleconnection. Zonal wavenumber 3 is not explicitly mentioned in the assessment 
reports, however, it is thought to be driven by the mechanisms similar to the ENSO 
teleconnection \citep{trenberth_progress_1998,inatsu_zonal_2004,karoly_southern_1989}, 
so similar trends might be expected. Changes to SH circulation that cause tropical 
convection events are expected to affect Rossby wave generation, as well as warming 
SSTs, which will weaken mid-latitude teleconnections through increased tropospheric 
static stability, weakening vertical motions and convective circulation 
\citep{muller_enso_2008}. As westerlies strengthen with warming temperatures,
stationary wave theory suggests the wavenumber -- inversely proportional to zonal 
mean flow -- generated by tropical convection events will decrease 
\citep{goyal_zonal_2021,wills_northern_2019}. Understanding how these phenomena and 
SH storm track climatology might change is of vital importance for projecting changes 
to regional climate, and is critical to adopting effective mitigation and adaptation 
strategies at the local and international level. 

Model realisations of the historical experiment evolve according to historical 
climate forcings, natural and anthropogenic. Future anthropogenic forcings are 
uncertain and are liable to change alongside societal developments. Therefore, 
feasible scenarios must be assumed in order to provide a dataset of forcing 
conditions that demarcate a path along which ESMs develop. The Scenario Model 
Intercomparison Project (ScenarioMIP) \citep{oneill_scenario_2016} is the organising 
framework under which CMIP6 multi-model projections are made, and forms the basis for 
studies into climatic changes, and resilience, mitigation and adaptation best 
practices. Predetermined scenarios have been outlined that encompass a number of 
variables, including emissions and land use changes. Scenarios are composed of Shared 
Socioeconomic Pathways (SSPs) \citep{oneill_roads_2017} -- assumed narratives of 
societal development and their implications for climate -- and Representative 
Concentration Pathways (RCPs) -- a net radiative forcing, implicitly including the 
influence of climate mitigation policy. SSPs are described in qualitative terms, such 
as investment in education, and translated into quantitative measures that can be 
interpreted by ESMs, such as population and urbanisation \citep{riahi_shared_2017}. 
The naming convention of ScenarioMIP experiments combine the two components, for 
example SSP1-2.6, a combination of SSP1 with a net radiative forcing of $2.6W/m^2$.

Scenarios were developed to encompass many possible futures whilst also retaining 
distinct outcomes, such that redundancies are minimised. Methods for achieving this 
included considering a large number of model realisations and noting at which point 
the climatology of certain quantities, such as precipitation, are significantly 
different. One important consideration was understanding how global average 
quantities, such as temperature, connect to climatic conditions at the regional 
level, as global quantities cannot convey synoptic extremes. 
\citet{tebaldi_sensitivity_2015} use an extensive database of model realisations and 
find global average temperature differences of 0.3°C result in statistically 
significant changes at regional scales. Scenarios were differentiated and defined 
according to this and other criteria, ensuring each led to statistically distinct 
outcomes.

The two scenarios investigated in this study are SSP1-2.6 
\citep{van_vuuren_energy_2017} and SSP5-8.5 \citep{kriegler_fossil-fueled_2017}. 
Both assume similar societal evolution, with heavy investment in health and
education, international cooperation in the near-future, and the application of 
comprehensive mitigation strategies. However, whereas SSP5 assumes 
technologically-advanced, fossil-fueled development, subsequently driving human 
captial and adaptative capabilities, SSP1 assumes a sustainable future with a shift 
in emphasis of the economy to human well-being, reducing inequality between and 
within nations. This creates two vastly different CO2 emissions scenarios, which 
should highlight disparities in the state of the Earth's climate, whilst controlling 
for other external factors. The isolation of the effect of GHG emissions minimises 
the number of other influences and should aid in narrowing down the cause of apparent
differences.