# Week 15

## 2022 June 10

### Composite Maps

- Results & Discussion

#### Southern Annular Mode

##### Full Time Series

Upper and lower quantiles of the full time series indicate the response of the mean height field to SAM modes is quite linear. The main difference between the two is the sizeable maximum in western Atlantic, off the South American coast; much more prominent in the upper quantile. This is reflected in the variance field upper composite, where there is significant storminess in the same region, whereas there is a much smaller variance anomaly in the lower composite, _why might this be? Any literature to corroborate this?_. Both mean height and variance fields have significant maxima in the Indian Ocean, in agreement with previous observations. Notably there is a skew in extreme variance values, the maximum over the Indian Ocean is the strongest anomaly, however it is much greater in the lower composite than the upper composite, an absolute difference of $5000m^2/s^2$.

##### Seasonal

Non-linearities in the mean height field response to SAM become apparent in the seasonal data. Upper and lower quantile composites take on different characteristics, with unique signatures. In summer, positive SAM has a highly symmetrical textbook pattern. However, negative SAM is relatively asymmetrical, with the Pacific quadrant missing the negative anomalous section of the ring, and the positive anomalies emanating from the pole do not reach as far north.

The largest anomalies occur in winter, as expected, and present asymmetrical patterns in both positive and negative modes, as is typical of wintertime SAM, _see corr/cov maps and literature_. However, there is a unique feature in the autumn negative SAM; a highly positive anomalous region located over the Amundsen Sea -- the strongest anomalies in any season -- as though the central region over the pole has been shifted towards the Pacific. It should be noted that the response of the mean height field is not isolated to responses to SAM, but the effects of other phenomena can leak into the picture. Given that the composites are an average picture of, in this case, the top 25 months, the effect should be minimal. However, Campitelli et al. 2022 {cite}`campitelli_assessment_2022` find that the asymmetrical component of SAM (A-SAM) can be isolated and is ZW3-like in nature. They also find that the connection between SAM and ENSO is entirely explained by A-SAM. This is a persistent phenomenom that could very well intrude on the composites, hence the strong asymmetry in this composite could be a result of a persistent simulataneously strong ZW3, _(a bit wishy-washy, not sure on this)_. Spring presents another notable picture; the negative SAM is textbook, but a strongly negative region intrudes over the Pacific into much lower latitudes. _What does any of this mean??_

The relationship between the mean height field and variance field is by no means clear either, with varied patterns of anomalies arising. Summer is a textbook SAM picture, and is linear in its response for positive and negative SAM. One noteworthy feature however, is the extensive and deep region of negative variance anomalies in the Pacific quadrant, colocated with the unusually stable mean height field (lack of anomalies). This translates well, since a more stable mean height field in the Pacific would lead to fewer storms.

Winter once more possesses particularly strong variance anomalies, in line with the response of the mean height field. As usual, nicely aligned with the regions of steepest gradient (over the zero-anomaly line). It could be argued that the extent of anomalies shifts from the western to eastern hemisphere between positive and negative modes. Positive SAM also has very little negative anomalies, whereas negative SAM has very strong positive anomalies at lower latitudes in the Atlantic and Indian oceans.

Spring is very unusual, completely different to the expected SAM signal. In the positive mode, an extensive band over 60S stretches from the mid-Pacific to South Africa, before switching to a strong negative region that continues across the Indian Ocean. Negative SAM seemingly has no pattern at all, with localised regions of strong anomalies and little overall structure. Autumn has very strong anomalies that obscure some of the structure, but there remains a clear SAM signal for both positive and negative modes.

The splitting of the jet stream is apparent in autumn and winter; increased storminess in the lower latitudes can be seen in negative SAM (lower composite) and the meridional distribution of variance is more extensive in positive SAM, i.e., there is increased storminess in observed in lower latitudes regardless of SAM state. However, there is not the expected effect in the Pacific, where the sub-tropical jet stream is most prominent. 

#### ENSO

##### Full Time Series

The full time series presents a picture for the mean height field similar to that seen in the correlation and covariance maps, with a strong response over the Pacific, particularly in the subtropics and over the Amundsen Sea. During La Nina events, a deep positive band of anomalies stretches across the subtropical Pacific and a further two positive regions are present over the Atlantic and Indian oceans. The Amundsen Sea low is also very prominent, presenting a somewhat ZW3-like signal, lending itself to the hypothesis presented in Goyal at al. 2021 {cite}`goyal_zonal_2021` -- ENSO-associated convection events drive ZW3. The pattern is quite SAM-like, a feature that has been previously documented, _find citations_. A similar mirror image is found for El Nino events, though with a couple of features that indicate non-linearities. The deep band of anomalies across the Pacific and over the Amundsen Sea are again present, but oppositely signed. There is also a poleward local negative minimum in the Pacific, adjacent to the Amundsen Sea. The two maxima over the Indian and Atlantic oceans are weaker, and another positive maximum is found off the south coast of Australia.

Variance anomalies are well-aligned with the steepest gradient in the mean height field in both La Nina and El Nino events, as per always. There is SAM-like signal, with a ring of positive storminess wrapped around the pole, centred over 50S. These are much stronger over the Pacific, a stronger localised response, however the effect does clearly extend across to the western hemisphere. However, this band could also be a product of SAM, as the two phenomena are strongly interlinked. The generally weaker magnitude of mean height anomalies translates across to the variance field, with generally weaker anomalies in El Nino events. _Check the sign of these, because technically El Nino is stronger._

##### Seasonal

The response in the La Nina events is inconsistent across seasons, with the usually ever-present band across the subtropical Pacific missing in some seasons, as well as the anomalous region over the Amundsen Sea. There are strong positive anomalies over the pole in spring, and strong negative regions over the pole in winter, however there is a distinct lack in the full time series, which could be a result of averaging the seasonal cycle. 

Summer La Nina events see a diminished localised response in the Pacific ring, but stronger teleconnective maxima in the Indian and Atlantic oceans. There is the usual deep region over the Amundsen Sea however. The Amundsen Sea anomalous region is shifted westward in El Nino events, _which is a feature also found MCA on daily data..._ The wintertime El Nino composite presents a more familiar ENSO response, superposed with a band of positive anomlies over the Indian Ocean and south of Australia. 

In autumn El Ninos, there is a deep negative region much further west of the Amundsen Sea, _which seems like it could be another feature of MCA on daily data..._ Autumn La Ninas has a more ENSO-like pattern, but with a strong negative band poleward of the typical position, centred on 50S. There is also a series of lows and highs around 50S but with a frequency higher than a typical ZW3. Spring time sees an El Nino picture almost identical to the full time series. Given that this is the time of year when El Nino is at its strongest, this is likely because spring is overrepresented in the full time series composite. Spring La Ninas have the expected subtropical positive band, but also has the aforementioned positive anomalies over the pole.

Variance anomalies generally align well with regions of steepest gradient in the mean height field. The variance field is most SAM-like during summer, with an almost whole ring of heightened storminess over 60S in La Nina events, and a negative semi-ring over 45S, both interupted over the Pacific. El Nino events see a similar structure, except the negative band over 45S is over the Pacific and extends more meridionally. Winter has a less coherent structure; El Nino events have a blue band of negative anomalies aligned with the steep gradient in the mean height field -- across the Pacific between the subtropics and Amundsen Sea. _(Would you always expect to see higher storminess in the regions with steepest gradient? If so, this doesn't make much sense.)_ There are a few other maxima that align with the mean height field, but don't speak to a bigger picture. 

Autumn also has little structure, at least few clear teleconnections. The usual localised response is present in the Pacific, with negative and positive anomalies aligning with the mean height field in both El Nino and La Nina events. Both La Nina and El Nino seem to elicit the same response, albeit to varying degrees in slightly different locations, but the general structure is the same -- lower variance/storminess over 60S and greater storminess over 45S. Spring returns to a SAM signal, particularly in La Nina events. A heightened storminess is present over most of the Pacific, but there is a partial ring of lower storminess is between South America and Australia, via the South Africa. El Nino almost mirrors the La Nina composite, with a negative band across the Pacific and positive in the opposite hemisphere. There is also a region of much greater storminess between Tasmania and Antarctica, that aligns with the trough between the strong positive and negative regions in the mean height field mentioned above. _Why is there so much variation in ENSO's response over the seasons? This is something that can be linked to the Daily MCA also, as many of the features seen seem to be present as MCA modes._

